Brett, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Well, thank you very much for having me.
It's awesome to have you here.
A pair of Kennedys on the show.
First time ever.
That's pretty awesome.
Yep.
Well, it should be much more common.
Indeed.
Well, thank you for coming on the show.
I'm really interested to talk some data science and mathy type things with Python.
is being used for data science and analysis and just general science and mathematics so
much these days. I wonder if people have maybe a perception out there thinking, well, Python,
it's kind of like, yeah, people use that for the web and stuff. And true. But these days,
it's data science, machine learning, those things, right? Yeah. I mean, other languages are used a
fair amount, you know, statistical analysis are still used to machine learning.
People will look at other languages.
You know, C++ is used a lot and like Mojo and things are coming, coming through now
that are, but still like a very, very large percent is done.
And then Python, all the work we're seeing with large language models, for example,
like that's pretty much all Python.
And a lot of standard traditional machine learning
a very large portion of it's done in Python, yeah.
- Yeah, and outlier detection as well.
- Yep, yeah, I think Python is probably,
I mean, arguably, but I think probably the richest set
of tools for outlier detection of any language.
Again, R has quite a good suite and you get good Java
and other places.
But Python is probably where you find the strongest,
just the sheer number of them.
And also, it covers a lot of the deep learning techniques
and some kind of approaches to outlier detection.
Yeah, awesome. Well, we're going to dive into it. You've written a whole book on it and a bunch of cool techniques you pulled out. We're going to talk about some libraries and things like that, as well as some other examples.
But before we get into that, let's just hear a quick introduction about who you are and what you do these days.
Sure. Yeah. Yes. Well, my name is Brett Kennedy. So I've worked in software in one capacity or another for about 30 years now.
I did my master's degree quite a long time ago at the University of Toronto.
And I was actually, well, I was around 98, 99.
So during one of the times when AI was maybe a bit of a winter.
And yeah, that was a very, very good experience going there.
And, yeah, I've worked for one company doing software that was used for financial auditing.
And that's where I really started to get into data science.
And that was about 15 years ago.
Kind of, you know, when it's a little bit not as mainstream as it is today.
I mean, there's certainly a lot of other people doing it.
But it wasn't, you know, the gigantic industry that it is now.
Yeah, there's definitely some inflection points or places where it's really taken some steps, significant steps up in the Python data science and ML space.
Probably one is the Pandas NumPy era around 2006, something around 2012.
I don't know really what caused that.
And certainly the machine learning AI is a whole other spike of growth there.
So you were doing it was kind of before mainstream data science, right?
Yeah, I mean, it was starting to become mainstream.
But like when working with text, for example, you know, there's certain, you know, there's spaCy and Word2Vac and Glove and things like that.
But, you know, this is long before GPT.
But, you know, Psychic Learn existed.
And yeah, so we're actually using a lot of the same tools that you would use now.
but they're a little bit earlier versions of them.
So things have progressed certainly a lot.
Though some things just work
and have been fairly stable.
In that space,
I imagine a lot of the work that's been done
on the faster CPython initiative
is probably paying benefits.
Yeah, I mean, one of the things about Python
is it does have a reputation as being not the fastest language you can use.
Now, old versions of Python were certainly slower.
It is getting faster.
Yeah, C++ is probably about as performant as you can get.
But a lot of like Psychic Learn, for example, uses Cython,
so you get C code.
Yeah, so you get...
Characteristics, yeah.
yeah it also goes back to you know what are you measuring what is your metric for fast
yeah expectations and yeah yeah well and i could make a really fast thing in two weeks in c plus
plus or i could make a somewhat slower thing but get you the answer in half a day in python
it might run five times longer but you'll have the answer today you know what i mean like that
kind of thing. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. There's, yeah, there's, there's really a trade-off and I think,
I mean, it's kind of the, well, it's, it's really the approach we've taken in data science is to
really privilege the data scientists time over the computation time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And
when it really does become a problem, there's a lot of stuff written in C or Rust or whatever,
you know, Polars, Pandas, et cetera. Yeah. Yeah. That Polars is a big breakthrough too. Like,
Yeah. Are you a fan of Polars? I've been using it.
I use it when there's a need. I mean, I'm still a big fan of Pandas and I still use it quite a lot.
But when there's a performance issue, yeah, Polars is one of the things I'll turn to.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah. Excellent. So we're going to talk about outlier detection.
and I think maybe a good way to sort of introduce this topic
is to maybe understand the problem space just a tiny bit
because sometimes you might think,
well, if the mean is really weird
or the median is really weird or something like that,
then we might have an outlier.
We can go check it out,
but it's really a lot more subtle than that.
And I want to maybe go back to a guest I had six months ago
or something like that, Stephanie Molin.
And she has this really cool project called Datamorph,
which I'll link to on GitHub, and we talked about it then.
But if you pull up her GitHub repo, it's an animated GIF, I believe,
of a whole bunch of different very clear concrete shapes,
like a star, literally a panda, not pandas, but the animal,
and continuous animation of a bunch of data points
that go from one to the other.
And it shows the mean over time.
It's the same.
The standard deviation is the same.
The correlation, the same effectively.
They're like, you know, four to the thousandth sort of thing.
And it just shows you this is not as simple as finding stuff that's just off the, that's, you know, linear interpolation line or something like that, right?
Yeah.
It's a good example.
using a single or a handful of metrics to evaluate a data set can be a bit oversimplistic.
You can miss a lot of nuance when you do that.
Yeah, yeah.
And you do definitely get into the same sort of issues when you're looking at outliers
in a lot of areas of data science where you can kind of misled by looking at metrics that
maybe, you know, are relevant, but, you know, just don't tell the full story.
Right.
It's one view, but maybe it's not.
For sure, like you said, it doesn't tell the whole story.
So let's talk about what is this outlier detection stuff,
and really why do people care,
what kind of problems are being solved with it, and so on.
Right, right.
Yeah, I mean, often when people start to learn machine learning,
one of the early things you'll learn is there's supervised machine learning
and there's unsupervised machine learning.
The two bigger areas of it are probably clustering and outlier detection.
And sometimes dimensionality reduction is kind of considered unsupervised as well.
So, you know, it's kind of a whole host.
It's kind of like there's a whole host of reasons you might want to do clustering.
It's a little bit like that.
know, it's just one of those things that turns up time and again when you're doing machine
learning.
So, yeah, outlier detection can be done for, for example, if you have a data set and you
just want to, say you just want to try and understand the data, you know, there's really
kind of two main parts to that.
There's, you know, what are, trying to figure out what are the general patterns in the data
And what are the exceptions to those?
And once you have both of those, you say, well, here's the patterns and here's the extent to which those patterns hold true in the data, which is the outliers.
That kind of gives you a good sense of what the data is.
When you're checking for data quality, outlier tests are very useful.
It gives you, like if you have, say, a table of, well, whatever it is, credit card transactions or whatever it is.
You can do this for image data or audio data or, you know, data of really any type.
But let's take a simple example of tabular data.
You might have a, you know, spreadsheet with a few million rows of credit card transactions or, you know, SQL table.
If you want to check it for errors before you go on to do other sort of analysis,
either data mining or building predictive models or the like,
one thing we often do is try and see, well, what kind of data quality am I dealing with here?
So, and there's a number of ways to do that, but one of the steps you might often perform is say,
well, do outlier detection and see, you know, what are the strangest rows in my data?
You see the strangest credit card transactions in there, or if you could be a little more involved analysis, you might look at, you know, the most unusual string of transactions for a given user or a given store or something like that.
And if you say, well, okay, weird is only this weird, then, you know, you can have some sort of sense of what sort of range of anomalousness might be in your data.
But yes, it's used, outlier detection is used a lot as well in security.
Would it be used like checking for fraud, checking for errors?
I mean, it's used in scientific analysis a lot.
You know, it's very common for scientific projects for just, you know, collect data,
you know, through sensors or, you know, hand collecting data or whatever.
Case of astronomy, it's through telescopes.
You know, we just collect, you know, well, astronomy is a good example where we collect such phenomenal volumes of data that if you want to find anything interesting in there, you know, we used to be able to find interesting phenomena in astronomy data just by manually going through it.
You know, one example given the book is that's how pulsars were discovered.
Probably.
So to really find something really, really interesting, given that we might collect
petabytes of data per night, really the most effective way is just go and run an anomaly
detection on the data and say, what are the strangest things in this set of data?
And those are, odds are there was going to be the most interesting things there.
the things we've never seen before or haven't seen a whole lot.
So at least some examples.
Yeah.
I do want to point.
Online video games as well as, oh, I'm sorry about that.
Oh, no.
When I talked to Sarah Eisen about imaging the black hole,
the first black hole image with Python,
She talked about shipping, actually shipping hard drives around to sync up the data because there was so much data that it was faster to put it onto a plane and send it from all the different locations around the world.
It literally couldn't keep up the internet.
And so they are like, all right, we're going to just box them up into these big crates and ship them around.
That's when you're talking that much data, you got to get a plane involved.
It's pretty wild.
Yeah, we weren't doing anomaly detection at the time, but yeah, one of the companies I've worked with, just dealing with financial data, we actually collected so much it's actually faster to mail it.
Really? You ended up doing that as well?
Yeah, at times, yeah.
Yeah, how much of a hard drive would you put in the mail?
It wouldn't be just a terabyte. It would have to be a pretty big hard drive or set of hard drives, right?
Yeah, well, part of the explanation of why we're doing this was this was about 15 years ago.
I see. I think a whole lot. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think the internet we were paying for at the time was, you know, having sort of speeds we have the internet now was, you know, the costs were prohibitive back then.
Yeah, exactly. I've gigabit up and down at home for 75 bucks, which you could have sent it over that probably.
It's not quite back when the internet had a sound. Do you remember when the internet had a sound?
I do remember.
And you would be like, okay, that's a good connection. We're going to have some stuff happening today.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, but that's early 90s when the internet stopped having a sound, mid 90s.
Yeah. Yeah. That's about when I first started getting a little,
just as it's just kind of being opened up. Yeah. Yeah.
I remember the early days,
basically university students that were on there.
Yeah, exactly. We would,
what I would do when I was in high school is I would, my brothers,
my brother and I, we would call the local university.
And they had a library dial up for dial up modems.
And then you get onto Telnet and go for an Archie before this is before the
worldwide web existed right before mosaic oh yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and for people that
yeah exactly tell that yes unencrypted ftp by the way we had so much trust we were so naive
but yeah when you would connect it would go
and depending on the sound you would get to where you would oh that means i connected this bitrate
or that bitrate, right?
It's so wild.
I'm nostalgic for it
and I want nothing to do with it.
I'm so happy we are where we are.
Yeah.
Yeah, there's a certain charm to it.
But if you went back to it,
you would hate it.
Yeah, I think now...
You would watch the images load.
You would almost see
the progressive scan lines come in.
I mean, it was really...
It wasn't ideal.
No, I had a roommate once
who used to download images.
These are just the same JPEGs, the same sort of files we have today,
but it would take literally overnight to download a JPEG.
Incredible.
Well, they were interesting times, but we've certainly moved on.
So that's all good.
Now, I think you talked about some examples where you're looking for outliers for fraud,
like credit card.
you talked about mailing around the financial data for those kinds of things.
I think it seems to me that outliers might also reveal new science or new
information that you didn't expect.
Like it's an outlier because it doesn't match our model,
but something is happening over here.
And I think, you know, you pointed out astronomy, right?
Like that part is really bizarrely bright.
Why is that so bright?
Is that a, you know, oh, that's a quasar.
That's what that is.
Yeah.
So yeah, brightness, you're not expecting,
a shape of a galaxy you're not expecting that sort of thing right that turns out to be a galaxy we
thought there was only one galaxy now there's many right that kind of thing yeah yeah yeah there's
yeah it's it's definitely a case but i think science is a definitely good example where um
you know outliers is something you want to find uh yeah it's like biological data it's it's used a
lot too and well i guess a lot of areas um uh the um particle accelerator at cern uh uses outlier
detection a lot just to just to find interesting things um and you know to check that you know
things are within certain bounds of what they expect or not um uh but yeah i mean when you're
dealing with certain domains um like in one example uh that's kind of maybe the other uh
end of the spectrum was be when you have say you're monitoring industrial uh systems uh like an
assembly line or something like this. You want the whole system to work in a specific way. And any
kind of veering from that is probably a problem or indication of a problem down the road.
Right. You've got some IoT thing or you've got a more industrial type of robot and all of a sudden
it's drilling holes outside of where you used to have it drill holes.
Yeah, yeah, it's behaviors unusual or just the sensors picking up
or certain sound levels that are higher than normal or oscillating faster than normal or something.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, so yeah, quite often, yeah, it could be something interesting or it could be a problem.
Yeah, it really depends on the context.
But in most cases, there's something that's, you know, for one reason or other, it's common for them to be worth investigating for one.
To expand your knowledge of the system or just to find fared out problems.
Sure. What's the scale of data that outlier detection makes sense for?
If I've got 20 measurements, does it make sense to ask this question?
If I've got 200 billion, is that too much to ask the question for?
Like, what's the story there?
Yeah, it's a good question.
I mean, when you have a very, yes, I mean, it's like a lot of areas.
I guess the same thing with clustering or predictive models or general things.
If too little data, you can have too much.
And there's kind of a sweet spot where the results are statistically stable, but it doesn't take you forever to find them.
They're statistically stable, but they can be computed.
Yes, yeah.
Yeah, it's not a lot of problems, you know, like if you have, say you're checking your, you're a large company and you're just checking your, your accounting data for anomalies.
And, you know, there can be a lot of value to it.
And you could probably, you know, in a lot of cases you can measure it in dollar value.
If you find fraud, like a high-level fraud where your CFO is misrepresenting the company or something, or low-level fraud where your staff are ripping you off, or just errors or inefficiencies.
Contractors or subcontractors or something, yeah.
Yeah, often when contractors are working on you some way, they'll be doing kind of a concert with maybe some of your staff.
There could be some collusion or things like that.
So looking at your staff behavior, it could be worth a lot of money and benefit in it.
But, you know, if it takes you 600 hours to run a process and you find, you know, one thing, it may or may not be cost effective.
Well, that example wouldn't be cost effective.
Yeah.
So there's kind of a, you know, a balancing act you want to follow.
So, yeah, if you have extremely small points, one is anomalous given the others.
If you have a bunch of, say you're going through your, maybe just looking at the example of staff and errors at a company.
Say you have on staff, you have a bunch of people employed.
They're purchasers.
They're just employed to buy supplies from your suppliers.
And, you know, some, maybe you have 10 of them and most of them may make an hour today.
You have one that every Friday makes, you know, 200 purchases a day.
So you only have like 10 points there, but, you know, one of them is so off the scale that you can say with some confidence that, you know, this is not necessarily a problem, but it is anomalous and it is worth understanding.
Yeah.
Either there's some errors or fraud or inefficiency or something,
or the other people are just, they're the anomaly.
They're not doing that.
They're not doing their job.
Yeah, they're not buying it.
Yeah, yeah.
But you're definitely right, too.
You can have the other problem.
You just have so much data, it's hard to go through.
Are there techniques, sorry,
are there techniques that people use for, like, use, for example,
DASC or
QPy
like the CUDA
stuff for GPUs
are there sort of like really high end compute
stuff that people are using for these problems?
Yep.
Yeah.
Especially if using a deep learning
well, I guess only
but if you're using something that has
a lot of matrix operations
yeah, a GPU will
speed that up.
And DASC
work out, especially have memory limitations as well.
A lot of outlier detection should be done in parallel, which can speed things up.
Outlier detection works a little bit like predictive models in that there's
there's a train step and then there's a inference step.
OK, so you train it what's normal and then you ask it if things are normal or not.
Yeah, exactly.
So normally what you do when you with outlier detection is you have a collection of data.
So if you take the example of an industrial process,
So say you monitor your.
Let's say in this example, a lot of data,
so collecting temperature and sound and humidity and so on information.
And so you have a process that's run for weeks without any problem.
So during that time, you know that everything was running properly.
So you take that data and.
and to train on and then that builds up a sense of what's normal.
In this case, it's not only statistically normal, but it's also kind of like a platonic norm.
It's desirable as well. And that's your inference step. And a lot of times they're done once or
every few months or something. And so it's not terrible if it takes a little bit of time to
to train and other contexts in like a real time situation you can have uh you know streaming
environments we're just constantly reading and dad and it's your sense of what's the new normal
you might be retraining every few minutes or
very few hours in in which case that becomes a lot more relevant so it can be it can be done off uh
offline but uh yeah and then and then your inference time and um and that that can be that
That could be really relevant.
There's certain ways to keep down your training time as well.
Sometimes if you have like months of sensor readings,
you might not need to train on all of them.
You can just take a sample of them or, you know,
a certain time slice or something like that.
And that's good enough to establish a decent sense of what's normal.
Right.
It seems to me that the training could be done on a subset
and that would probably be okay.
But I feel like the detection might need to run nearly on everything, right?
Because it might be that one in a million sort of thing, right?
Astronomely, you're looking for that one little bright spot or that one little dip in brightness for a transit of a planet or something.
Or, you know, I've had my credit card put on a block until I unblocked it because I bought something in a vending machine for a dollar with a credit card.
and they're like well a lot of people who steal cards they'll take them to vending machines to
try them because it's a safe place with no one there to see if the stolen card still works and
then they'll go do bad stuff yeah yeah yeah um yeah i mean i think i would suspect
well it could have been because they do run outlier detection routines they could be done
or they could have been using like a rule-based system like you're describing where
you know if it's for very you know if it's in a certain location for a certain dollar value
a certain time of day and i might have just faked it because of that it was very shady i was at the
university oh that's good but yeah yeah it's definitely the case that i'm in most of the time
when you're running outlier detection yeah you want to check all of your data because otherwise
it kind of you know the question is are there any anomalies in my data there are exceptions to that
sure it's largely free of outliers or that you know there's not uh i mean depending on how you
define them um like for example with sensor readings like you always expect a certain number
of point anomalies like a certain point in time where you know something spikes up and it's not
it is an anomaly but it's not a big deal um so in some cases you might just want to make sure
that your number of point anomalies is normal.
So you don't have an unusual number of unusual events.
And in that case, or cases like that,
or if you're just doing data quality checks, for example,
you might just want to make sure your data is largely.
How do you know that you don't get outliers
in your training set?
If you just feed it like a stream of data,
you're like, well, this is what's normal.
Actually, there were outliers,
but you weren't ready to detect them yet.
And now it thinks they're normal.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Most of the time when you train, you do assume that there's a certain number of outliers in your data.
Yeah, so what you're training on is often a statistical norm.
It's what's normative.
It's not necessarily what's ideal and clean.
It's very hard to get data that's really clean.
And if you do, it often biases the data in one way or what kind of undermines.
outlier detection sometimes.
It's almost like overtraining maybe.
A similar idea to that in that
it learns very specific
patterns as being
actually what's fairly common in outlier detection
is to train and do inference on the same data
with the idea that, you know, you know, there's outliers in there anyway.
So, so in some cases, like, well, go back to the example of a,
let's say a credit card company.
So you have, you want to check all your transactions for the last day.
So you have a hundred gazillion and you could,
You could train on that and then you can also run inference on that.
So you can say relative to today's transactions,
which are the unusual ones, unusual relative to.
So it's something you wouldn't do in prediction problems,
but you actually can.
It's fairly common to do that in outlier detection.
And it's just with the idea that, you know,
as long as most of the data is, is, is typical,
most algorithms will be able to find the records
that are the most extreme or the most unusual
in one way or another relative to the other ones in the data.
That's very interesting.
You can train on the data and then ask it
to find the outliers in that same data.
Yeah, it's kind of interesting.
That seems very counterintuitive, yeah.
It is a little counterintuitive,
but I guess the simple example I gave earlier
where you have 10, 10 us purchasers for your company, you would you could use those 10 to
establish a sense of what's normal. And it would say, well, about four purchases a day is normal.
And this one person that has 200 every Friday, that's unusual. So it's actually doing you can,
you know, do that in the same data. Now, having said that, what you do do an outlier detection.
and as you get a little bit of it, you know, start with the original data and find the most anomalous
records in there and then you might inspect them manually and say, okay,
these are things, yeah, that we wouldn't normally expect to happen. So we can remove those or
other things you see. They're extreme, but there's nothing wrong with them. They could happen.
Yeah. Or maybe they're a lightning flash when you're looking through a telescope.
It's really bright.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, you get a lot of, like, when you're dealing with anything like that, you get a lot of data artifacts where it's not that the phenomena that happened that you're monitoring was unusual.
It's the equipment you use to monitor it.
Add some sort of, yeah, power or something like that.
That's a data artifact. You might want to remove it.
So sometimes you just, you kind of iteratively make your data cleaner and cleaner and it gets a kind of more pristine sense of what's normal.
I see.
But you can overfit.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
You go too far doing that.
Yeah, would you maybe find, sort of do a, like you say, a loop a couple times, say, train it and then ask it what's abnormal and figure out, well, these things are truly not part of the things we want to consider.
So we'll take them out and then train it again, excluding those and kind of like iterate on it that way.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, that's, it's not imperative.
But that would be a fairly standard way to do things.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
So we haven't properly introduced your book yet,
Outlier Detection in Python from Manning.
And I want to give you a chance to give a shout out about it.
And then I want to talk to you about a couple of things
that you've covered in your book, of course.
So I know that we have some discount code for the book
that Manning has given us.
I'll put that in the show notes for people interested.
But yeah, tell us about your book of it
and why do you write it
and what people can learn from it.
Yeah, okay.
Well, one job I worked at a few years ago,
I just spent an enormous amount of time.
I was managing a research team
and there's about 10 of us on the team.
And we looked into a lot of areas,
but the biggest one for us.
So we were doing a lot of work around that for this is a company, as I mentioned, that was doing financial auditing.
So we're building tools that would allow financial auditors to when performing an audit, examine their clients data and just, you know, in a fairly easy way, see what's, you know, what's unusual in their data with the idea that, for example, if you're looking through their financial transactions,
like if you're an accounting firm and you're auditing spatula world,
this example I used to always give for the weird elf ends, I guess,
they would have a set of sales and a set of purchases
and a set of payroll transactions and so on.
So you can go, what auditors would often do is just find
the most anonymous of those, the ones that you can do.
that are among the most important to investigate to see if there's anything that could suggest an
error or something like that. So we spent a lot of time doing that. We were working with regulators
around the world, not just audit firms, but also regulators and bodies like that. And we spent a
of time looking at well how can we justify the outliers that we we're we're finding um
because you know if we run uh some of these most of these algorithms are a little bit like black
boxes blocks algorithms like um like if you're doing a predictive model and you send things
through an xg boost model or a neural net or something it gives you a prediction and it's
it's hard to say why it made that prediction so a lot of outlier detection algorithms are like that
But it's kind of an issue sometimes because in outlier detection, probably more than with prediction or classification or something, or clustering, I should say, it's important to have an explanation of why something is unusual.
Like, you know, if you're flagging something as being actually fraudulent, if you're doing security and you're flagging some web activity as being problematic or, you know, a person in some sort of security context is possibly being some sort of security risk.
you got to know why in order to investigate and
effectively. So a lot of time looking at how to make outlier detection one interpretable and also
just kind of justify the results that we're finding. If we were building tools that would
assess tables of data and come back with a summary of them saying, these are the most unusual
records in the, it's actually a problem to try and explain why that was the case.
So I ended up just, you know, reading, you know, hundreds of, I think like literally hundreds of
papers on the subject. And we did a lot of original research and ended up building up
quite a lot of expertise, but also during that time, it just, it just really, it was just a really
fascinating interesting problem just is outlier detection is just a really it just kind of grabs
you because um yeah it's just kind of something fascinating but you're trying to figure out you
know if you have a collection of images or collection of sound files or collection uh
like one job i had we were working with network data like um like social networks in that case
um you know connection uh kind of graph models um you know what are the most unusual records in there
um yeah it's just it's just it's just really challenging um there's no definitive answer
but there's certainly you know good answers and there's there's ways to do it efficiently and
interpretably and accurately but it's it's difficult but it's it's it's really rewarding
when you kind of get something,
a hard problem like that working well.
Yeah, I imagine it's the kind of thing
that if you have those answers,
you kind of become real good friends
with the CEO or the decision makers.
They're like, this person,
this person can look at it
and answer the questions
that we can't even know to ask.
Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
It does open up different ways
of thinking about things.
yeah yeah it's just yeah it has a lot of you know a lot of benefits when you're looking at data
yeah imagine you can probably also make really important decisions for
where to put your energy in your your company right like you had spatula world as an example
like if some product all of a sudden seems like it's it's doing really well and that's an outlier
like should you you should be able to answer this is actually gaining a lot of traction we should
manufacturer a bunch or no, that's just some weird glitch.
And that's not going to be, that's not predictive of, you know,
should we order a hundred thousand green spatulas or is that just something weird
that happened in some restaurant kind of bought all the ones at a store or
something? Right?
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, exactly. It's, it's really hard to,
but important to be able to quantify these things. Exactly. Yeah.
Give some context of, yeah, you,
you could end up in a bad place if you make an investment. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes, yes. It's the curse of half understanding.
I've got a great idea.
All right. Let's talk about some of the tools that you highlighted in your book.
Like the PyOD, Python outlier detection.
Yeah, let's talk about this one.
What's the story of this thing?
It's used quite a bit, used by 4,000 people and 8,8,000 GitHub stars.
That's pretty well used.
it is yeah it's really the it's the go-to um one for outlier detection in python um i think i think
anyone's doing any kind of machine learning work in in python i mean the one tool there they'll
know is scikit-learn uh and scikit-learn comes with uh four outlier well it comes with four
outlier detectors um and also so some tools that make tivoli's outlier detection like has a kde
tool see kernel density estimation which makes it fairly easy to find outliers such as points in
space that have low density um that's what a clustering method called gaussian mixture models
gm gm which makes it uh outlier detection using that as well but pi odd yeah so pi odd has those
has basically everything in scikit-learn wraps it in its own interface and i think a couple dozen
more. And it also has a number of deep learning based ones. So for tabular data, it's
it's really to go first, probably. So yeah, in terms of deep learning as well, auto encoders,
variational auto encoders, GANs. There's some there are some limitations with PYOD and I do get into
that in the book. And since you're data, for example, which you know, if you're dealing with
tabular data realistically you have mixed data you know a lot of categorical columns or date columns
supply does not handle that and it's it's strictly for tabular data so if you're working with time
series data or image data audio data that sort of there are there are other tools involved for that
but yeah for tabular data it's it's it's pretty it's pretty much the most used one okay
yeah so let's see here got the nlp 80 bench for nlp anomaly detection so i'm guessing this is
in text i'm not sure you have to tell us what kind of stuff you detect with that but you know i want
to give it some articles or maybe give it social media posts or something along those lines and
ask it what kind of questions could you ask it about that um i mean nlp is kind of
it's a DIC area without layer detection and DIC is too strong word.
It's a harder area.
It's certainly a harder area to work with because like if,
like if you have tables of data, again, like let's say accounting data,
for example, if a bunch of transactions, it's,
it's difficult to say which are the most unusual transactions in your data.
It's kind of like, you know, you know, when you see it,
Like if you see something that's very unusual, you can say, okay, that transaction is unusual.
With text, that is harder to say.
I mean, if it's a completely different language or something like that, or the tone or writing style is completely different.
You have curse words and people might think it's angry, but in fact, it's just sort of a coarse way of expressing excitement, right?
Like, oh, these people are really angry.
Like, no, they're actually really happy, but they don't really express it super properly.
But if the resident corpus did not have any expletives, then in a sense, that's anomalous in that way.
Yeah, with just so many ways to be just a little bit different.
Yeah, I would consider it one of the more challenging areas of outlier detection.
Yeah, type series is straightforward as well.
Yeah, I'm sure.
We'll talk about LLMs as well and see how that changes things in a little bit.
And the other one you mentioned is scikit-learn.
Like this is kind of the granddaddy of a lot of the data science type of stuff.
And they've got a whole section on novelty and outlier detection.
Maybe I'm going to head it up on the screen for a little bit,
but give people a sense of the kind of problems you can ask with this one.
Well, yeah.
- How did you solve questions you can ask?
- Yeah, it's a little bit like Piad, it's less so,
but it doesn't have like 30 sectors,
it has four, but it includes two of them.
So again, it's just for tabular data.
And again, it's just numeric tabular data,
but it has two of the go-to algorithms.
They're called, one's called isolation forest
and the other is called local outlier factor.
And I think most of the time without layer detection,
if you're doing on tabular data,
if you're only going to use two algorithms,
those are the two.
Outlier detection is a little bit different than say prediction,
because, you know, if you're building a predictive model,
say on tabular data, you know, most of the time you would use,
say an XG boost model or a cat boost model or random forest
or something like that, you tend to use one.
model. Sometimes it's the accuracy you can, you create an ensemble. I mean, actually
boosted internally is an ensemble of it's a boosted ensemble of decision trees. But,
you know, normally you wouldn't, sometimes you do, but probably more often we don't create,
you know, a novel of a K&N and an SVM and a neural net and a random forest.
In outlier detection, that's a lot more common to do that.
And the reason is that each outlier detection algorithm
can be a little bit limited in one way or another.
Not in an extreme way, but they each look for
different types of outliers and they each look for outliers in different ways.
And it's just,
there's a lot more advantage to using multiple detection algorithms with outlier
detection than you would with prediction.
And you can do it in just really simple ways. If you say, you know,
at scikit-learn has four outlier detectors. It has isolation forest.
It has local outlier factor.
has one called SESM and has one called elliptic envelope.
So if I run the four of those on my data,
and let's say all four of them are appropriate and work well,
any records that are scored highly by all four of those detectors,
you can say, well, these records are really...
Yeah, that's interesting to see.
Weird.
Yeah, you can let it say, we've checked many different ways
and we've got the same answer that it's an outlier in these different aspects.
And so it's really likely.
Yeah.
It's really likely.
It's not necessarily a problem, but it is statistically unusual.
And, yeah, and I think, you know, if you're just a lot of intense outlier detection work to do, you just have a, you know, small data set.
You just want to quickly get a sense of what, you know, what are the most anomalous records in it.
Just using scikit-learn with the assumption that you, you know, you're using scikit-learn.
anyways, for a lot of you working out,
is it be sufficient for a lot of cases.
If you want to do a little bit more thorough job
using more detectors, again, and just using detectors
that can be a little bit more--
PIOD has one more interpretable.
It could be a good decision just to use PIOD
and use a bunch of the detectors there.
One of the nice things about PIOD is it has the same API signature for all of its detectors.
So if you write code and it only.
Usually only like four really kind of easy
other than the hyper parameters for them.
It's really quite easy to kind of swap one out and swap in another and just
you know, try a whole whole bunch of them.
So one thing I do get into the book is that.
A lot of that can be very useful to use
the ones in PYOD, they're they're they're good
and they're sufficient quite often, but they're they're they're
they're limited into how interpretable they are.
So again, if you're in a situation where you're saying, well.
Security or this looks like failing equipment or this looks like
a novel, specimen, what say, say from astronomy, this looks like a novel, transit.
this is a transit. That's not normal. you kind of, you want to know why. And,
yeah. So a lot of the detectors from PIOD don't, don't provide that, necessarily to the degree
you would wish. So I, I, you know, do suggest a bunch of others that could be useful for that
purpose and that support categorical data as well.
But yeah,
stuff like male,
female or.
Exactly.
Low income or whatever.
Yeah,
exactly.
Okay,
cool.
Another one.
We talked about time series a little bit.
You said the time series are pretty challenging and I guess it depends on how
much,
how rapidly the time series data is coming in.
Yeah,
that's actually one of the things about time series.
data is that it can come it could be streaming and coming in and yeah so just like i was saying
like very often we use uh ensembles of outlier detectors to try and analyze the data and
by their nature ensembles can be a little bit slower now you can run them in parallel
yeah right because it's basically you take three or four or a thousand decision trees and you ask
them all what their answers are and then you kind of like decide what the it's like a voting process
or something almost right yeah yeah yeah so yeah and that would be exactly the how you would do it
in a predictive model so with the um an outlier detection model well there's probably the closest
thing to what you just described um without layer detection is uh there's an isolation forest
which is a forest of isolation trees. So it's kind of similar ideas.
It's probably close to a little bit close to random forests,
probably a little closer to extra trees for anyone who's familiar with
predictive models. Yeah, that's the isolation forest.
So it's kind of the outlier detection equivalent of extra trees model.
And like that is that it's, you know,
composed of a whole bunch of trees and depending on the implementation of it,
not scikit-learns, but depending on the implementation of it,
you can run all those trees and you know,
your answer is quite fast. If you have sufficient hardware,
what can also be done without layer detection too is which can actually,
depending on your, your environment,
work a little faster is can actually be faster to run your detectors in sequence,
believe it or not, because what you can do then is
I don't know how you find your outliers, but say you say, I'm only concerned with things that are flagged by the isolation forest and the local outlier factor model and the KNN model and the auto encoder model.
You can run them.
So anything that's filtered out by the first model doesn't need to be sent to the second model or the third model or the fourth model.
So you can kind of put the fastest one out first and then the second.
Yeah, that's interesting.
almost like thinking about it like an if statement or a while loop or something in programming where
where the ands short circuit so you know like you want to do the simplest test first and then the
next one the next one and you're only going to evaluate it until you hit a false and then you
stop yes exactly yeah yeah yeah that's yeah that's a good way to put it or something yeah yeah
okay yeah if you do it in sequence that's that'll definitely speed it up rather than taking all the
to run it in parallel across all the cores you're like well look how awesome it is it's using all
the cores but if yes that's right you're like no we just run less of it so we don't have to do it
so much yeah yeah i mean that there would still be benefit to that not typically how anomalous things
are uh which you might like uh i mean if if you're not looking for to flag the individual anomalies
you're trying you're more interested in collecting statistics about the volume of anomalies like you're
it's more a data monitoring project or something like that as opposed to picking out the individual
and um you might but if you just want to pick out the really anomalous records yeah then yes they
might be the ones that are flagged by all of your detect or almost all of your detectors right well
you don't even have to do you could even do it partially like if if it's not flagged by three
out of five then we're not going to pass it further down the line yeah like you could still do some
some sort of intermediate, more squishy analysis like that.
But you could still short-circuit it some.
Yeah, kind of a sweet spot, yeah.
Yeah, that would be a good balance, I think, yeah.
Yeah, okay.
I mean, it's a little, like anything,
there's going to be false positives and false negatives,
but you would just get a good balance of that.
Yeah, nice.
So one of the other projects that you called out is Profit,
Timeshare is an anomaly detection with Profit,
and it's based on the Facebook's open source library.
profit. This is profit anomaly detection versus just straight profit, which is a tool for producing
high quality forecast for time series data that has multiple seasonality with linear and non-linear
growth. I imagine that Facebook probably has a lot of data in its time series.
Yep. If anyone does, yes, they would have phenomenal amounts. And there's probably all
sorts of things they want to they want to forecast.
And yeah, this is so tell people about this, this project and how they might use it.
Yeah, I mean, there's a number of ways to do outlier detection with time series data.
And it's, it's a little bit like I was saying with tabular data, you can look at your data in all kinds of different ways.
And they might all be legitimate, they just find different types of outliers are really, really simple case, which can be useful.
despite its simplicity, is if you just have just a timeline over time of points.
So say you have, well, say your social media be enough that
you might want to look at, you know, your server usage or ad revenues.
And there's just all kinds of things that you're predicting.
Right.
maybe one thing that thinks will be going viral. And so maybe we should boost that in the algorithm and show it to more people.
Yeah, which can be very good or not so good. But anyway, it still works with the incentives and the goals of a we want more engagement in the platform.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, I guess one would be a simple example of weather data or going outside of a social media company where you just tracked, you know, temperature over time.
And there's a certain seasonality to that.
What is that plot there?
That is hard to say what that is.
Their example is, let's see if they call it out.
Oh, that could be weather data.
Or it could be.
They don't really say.
Have they named their, all their data is named DF.
They do.
Play Profit Works is a table of data, and they only have two columns.
There's the time column, and there's the value column.
The legend says anomaly actual predicted base.
There's no information here that tells you what data this is,
but it still gives you a cool picture to show you how it works.
Here's the prior block of data, like last week or something.
And now here's the next week.
And are we going to predict if this is an anomaly or not, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, that is kind of the nature of time series data.
It doesn't really matter if it's weather data or stock data
or bird migration data.
As long as there's certain patterns to it that can be found, you can work with that kind of equivalently.
So, yeah, what I think they're showing are something you often do in time series data is you have a certain pattern that's existed in time.
So there's a certain downward trend in that and there's some seasonality.
And so maybe those might be days of the week or yeah, those look like days of the week.
So maybe things are busier on a weekend or something like that.
And that occurred.
So given the patterns that have occurred in the past, where, you know, like at the time of the day and the day of the week, the month, the year and the like, you can make projections into the future forecasts.
And then you look at your actual data.
And if your forecast is generally correct, but you have some points that are way off from your projection, that's a form of anomaly.
So that's something that's often to say.
You know, given the history of what we've seen, we would have really expected a value of, you know, 10 here, but we see a value of 38.
So there's something unusual there.
It just doesn't follow the normal seasonality and normal trends that we've seen.
Yeah, it probably can't necessarily give you too much insight as to why, but you should go look at it, right?
Because it's just the quantity and time, right?
It's pretty sparse data.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you might be able to see why you made the prediction you did because it's just based on depending on how you do.
There's a lot of ways to do profit works a certain way, and there's a lot of ways to do time series forecasting.
But generally, you're just looking at the regular patterns, the general trend, and maybe just leg features and things like that.
So you can figure out why you made the prediction you did.
But yeah, why it actually had the actual value that it did, yeah, you'll probably have to go and investigate.
Sure, maybe pull up some different tools and different algorithms now that you know and focus in on that.
All right, Brett, let's talk about one more thing while we're here.
What's the story with LLMs and outlier detection?
And I think there's two angles I'd like to talk about this with you pretty quickly, just briefly.
One, can I just throw a ton of data at ChatGPT?
And I'm not talking the ChatGPT4 model.
I'm talking like O1, the higher-end model that could hold all the data potentially,
it's a little bit more thorough and ask it find me the outliers like is that a world a thing that
you might might work and the other is could i give it some data and say describe the data and say
okay here's the situation here's what this data means recommend me algorithms and tools and
libraries and and even techniques to analyze it like is chat makes sense for either of these
It can. I mean, it's going to be like a lot of things. If you have an expertise in these sort of areas, you're going to be better off just to take advantage of that.
But like a lot of areas of data science, if you're working into an area that you don't happen to have spent years thinking about, these tools can be a good place to get you started.
I've worked with them a bit. And what I've found is, I have to admit, I haven't used O1 yet.
I used tools that were a little bit older.
And what I was finding is it was suggesting outliers,
but in a really perfectly limited way.
So it would suggest doing like a Z score or Z score test
on your numeric columns or checking interquartile ranges
and things like that, which are good ways to find outliers.
And I think it may be suggested, you know, using an isolation forest and a couple.
Thanks.
So I think it was reasonably well.
I kept trying to do a lot of prompt engineering to try and get it to push it towards more sophisticated analysis of the data.
And that wasn't happening.
Though, you know, who knows, maybe if not these,
this version may just want,
I think we're heading to that point where it can start to do that.
And again, yeah, same with trying to summarize the data
and find the patterns in there.
Yeah, it's able to do fairly well.
Yeah.
It's not at the level of like, you know, what a real,
certainly not at the level of someone with domain expertise
that really understands the data is going to be able to do.
But it can provide some rough summarization of the data.
Maybe point you in the right direction to find some tools you don't know,
maybe, and you could go use them.
Yeah.
I mean, but so I'm not, I'm kind of like leaning towards saying
it's not going to be doing the best.
But having said that, they work a lot better for when I have tested them
for outlier detection than a year ago or something.
So it's heading in the direction where they might be able to do something quite useful.
Yeah, I've started using the O1 model, and it's a lot slower,
but you just got to change your mindset.
It's not a chat conversation.
It's like I've given an intern a job, and I expect it to come back with me later.
And it's getting better and better.
It's a crazy time.
Yeah.
Oh, it's, it's, it's.
Yeah, it really is.
It really is.
Yeah.
All right.
Awesome.
Well, mixed feelings.
Yeah, I know.
I know.
Let's close this whole thing out with maybe just a final call to action.
People are interested in this topic.
They want to do more.
Maybe another shout out to your book if you want.
And yeah, just people, people are interested.
They want to do more.
go deeper. What do you tell them?
Oh, definitely.
I would recommend the book,
of course. I really, it's on
Manning. I really wanted to write
when I was looking to
write with Manning. It's just
a publishing company. I always
thought highly of it.
Let's go Manning.com
and look for a layer detection.
And I think, well, if you have
the affiliate link, that'll give
you 45% off too, which is, which is a nice link. I think, I mean, yeah, you know, the book has
gotten quite good feedback. One thing that's really, people are architects of the, you know,
the most important algorithms in outlier detection. So things like isolation forest,
local outlier factor, extended isolation forest. They gave some really nice feedback on the book.
So it's gotten quite good feedback so far.
And I think it's probably as comprehensive a book as you would need.
I'll say it's quite comprehensive.
I was going through it.
Yeah, I think it covers what you would.
Yeah.
I think, no, it doesn't mean, you know, if you're not doing time series analysis, for example, you can probably skip the chapter in time series analysis or deep learning.
but most of it I think is actually there's a lot of gotchas with outlier detection I mean they're not
you know too hard to get your head around but you do have to think about them
and so it does cover pretty much anything you want to would need to know I think for almost any case
you wouldn't need to look for too many other resources after reading this yeah excellent and
PIOD is also another good resource maybe to get started with you think I would yeah I would
depending on your situation
and then if you really need to go into deep learning
I would go into deep OD
or even just PIOD
and for time series
there's quite a number of libraries
you can use as well
okay excellent
well thank you so much for being on the show
and sharing your work
well thank you very much for having me
yeah that was very good
yeah you bet
Bye now.